---
permalink: /kazakhs-dance-culture-kara-zhorga
layout: post
title: "Kazakh Dance Culture and the Origins of Kara-Zhorga"
author: "Anvara Sadykova"
author_img:
author_bio: "Senior Teacher at the Kazakh National Academy of
Choreography, situated in Nur-Sultan, the capital of Kazakhstan, teaches
a number of core modules on the Kazakh dance, theory and methodology of
teaching Kazakh and historical dance as well as the history of the world
and national choreography."
date: 2021-09-15
descrip: "It is known that dance is a bodily expression of human feelings and emotions. Every nation has its own lexicography and distinguished style of dance. How things were with the development of Kazakh dance?"
noshow_img: true # i don't know what this is and i'm scared of it
bigtitle: false
image: "https://voicesoncentralasia.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Picture1.jpg"
bigtitle_img: "https://voicesoncentralasia.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Picture1.jpg" # for opengraph
carousel_img: "https://voicesoncentralasia.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Picture16.jpg" # for carousel
no-carousel-fades: false
western-eyes: false # to add to western eyes list, edit `_data/eyes.yml`
categories: ['publication']
modalId:
---

#### **It is known that dance is a bodily expression of human feelings and emotions. Every nation has its own lexicography and distinguished style of dance. How things were with the development of Kazakh dance?**

In this interview, Anvara Sadykova, Senior Teacher at the Kazakh National Academy of Choreography, Nur-Sultan, and historical dance as well as the history of the world and national choreography, talks about the long history of bold and expressive Kazakh dances, how they mirrored the lives of the steppe nomads, expressed their feelings and even served as a social parody. A separate question that Anvara helps to investigate is the origins of the popular dance 'Kara Zhorga' (Black Pacer) which had been revived recently with astonishing popularity.

**Interview with ANVARA SADYKOVA**

> In the period from 2009 to 2021, Anvara staged more than 45
> choreographic compositions, including two ballets "Turan dala -- Kyran dala" (The Kazakh Land', 2017)
> and "[Zheltorangy turaly anyz](https://youtu.be/ZgMwNDu7zMU)" (The Legend about Turanga, 2020).

Anvara is passionate about promoting Kazakh national dance and
choreography. She holds master-classes and lectures on Kazakh dance and
gives seminars on the history of national choreography in Kazakhstan and
abroad.Â 

_This publication is part of the Abai Center Series. The Abai Center
recognizes the legacy of Abai Kunanbaiuly, a great Kazakh poet,
philosopher, and founder of written Kazakh literature, as well as the
rich heritage of the Kazakh culture more broadly. It is both a virtual
space for articles and blogs via [The Abai Center](https://abaicenter.com/), as well
as a welcoming host of events such as presentations and discussions on
literature, arts, cinema, music, history, archeology, and anthropology._

**Anvara, please tell us a little bit about your institution -- what
place does the study and teaching of Kazakh national dance take in the
program of the Kazakh National Academy of Choreography in
Nur-Sultan?**

First of all, I would like to point out that [The Kazakh National
Academy of Choreography](https://balletacademy.edu.kz/en/home-en/) is
the only higher educational institution in Central Asia with a full
cycle of multi-level professional choreographic education. It was open
in 2016 at the initiative of the First President of the Republic of
Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev. The Rector of the Academy is the
People's Artist of Russia, a world-famous ballerina Altynai Abduahimovna
Assylmuratova.

![Shara Zhienkulova at the Kazakh dance lesson in the 1930s. Archive of
the Museum of the National College of Choreography named after
Seleznyov.](https://voicesoncentralasia.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Picture1.jpg){:.float-right }

"Kazakh dance" as a discipline was introduced into the curriculum for
the first time in 1965 by a professional Kazakh dancer, People's Artist
of Kazakhstan, the legendary Shara Zhienkulova (1912 -- 1991). She
published a number of books, including the book 'The Secret of
Dance'[\[1\]](#_ftn1) (1980), where she described Kazakh
folk dances in great detail, supplementing it with the images of
costumes and dance positions as well as musical notes. Shara's
traditions at the Almaty Choreographic College named after A. Seleznev
are successfully continued by her former student, an outstanding teacher
of Kazakh dance, Gainikamal Beisenova.

[READ MORE](https://voicesoncentralasia.org/did-the-kazakhs-have-their-own-dance-culture-and-what-are-the-origins-of-kara-zhorga-the-nations-favorite-dance/)



<!--
![*Shara Zhienkulova at the Kazakh dance lesson in the 1960s. Archive of
the Museum of the National College of Choreography named after
Seleznyov*](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABAQMAAAAl21bKAAAAA1BMVEUAAP+KeNJXAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAApJREFUCNdjYAAAAAIAAeIhvDMAAAAASUVORK5CYII=){.stk-image
.stk-reset .wp-image-7230 .pk-lazyload width="1300" height="964"}

At the National Academy of Choreography, the class "Kazakh dance" is
included into the professional education program from the 5th year of
study and is taught for 3 years. At this level, our students study
Kazakh dance as future professional performers, that is, ballet dancers
and professional ensemble dancers. Further, undergraduate students study
the theory and methodology of teaching Kazakh dance for two years, and
then, at the Master's and Doctoral levels, the students study Kazakh
dance from a research perspective. Classical ballet heritage,
contemporary choreography and, of course, Kazakh dance make up the
repertoire of the Kazakh National Academy of Choreography. I am pleased
to say that in January 2021, we introduced the Handbook on Kazakh dance
-- a collective work carried out by the members of the Laboratory of the
Kazakh National Dance: professionals of performing arts, pedagogues,
ballet masters, researchers and other experts working in the field of
Kazakh national dance led by Toigan Izim, Aigul Tati, Aigul Kulbekova,
Anvara Sadykova and Almat Shamshiev.

****There is an opinion that the nomadic peoples did not have their own,
historically established folk dance, which was made up for by a rich
musical and singing culture. What can you say about
this?![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABAQMAAAAl21bKAAAAA1BMVEUAAP+KeNJXAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAApJREFUCNdjYAAAAAIAAeIhvDMAAAAASUVORK5CYII=){.stk-reset
.stk-theme_16040__symbol_custom_image_1866407 .stk-icon
.pk-lazyload}****

This is one of the most frequently asked question, and it is
understandable. However, we dare to disagree with this opinion.

One of the brightest bodily expressions of human emotions by any person
or any nation is dance. Nomadic peoples are no exception. Yes, of
course, we do not exclude the historical unevenness of the development
of the dance culture of our ancestors, but to say that there was no
historically established folk dance, I think, is completely wrong!

The longer I work in the field of Kazakh dance, the more I admire the
wisdom of our people, the deepest knowledge of our ancestors who were
able to leave us a great cultural heritage. Over the centuries, the body
language of our folk dance has been formed -- expressive, beautiful,
giving you the 'raw' material to work with, and to stage beautiful
choreographic miniatures, compositions, ballets and dance scenes on
completely different topics, embracing both the every-day reality and
highly philosophical reflections. Such presence of various movements and
themes of Kazakh dance could not appear from nowhere, without the
fundamental basics!

Unfortunately, the canonical forms of the oldest dances have not reached
the present day for various reasons. But the themes of ancient dances
and traditional movements are carefully passed down from generation to
generation. The works of the researchers and practitioners of Kazakh
dance such as Dauren Abirov, Aubakir Ismailov, Shara Zhienkulova,
Uzbekali Dzhanibekov, Lidia Sarynova, Olga Vsevolodskaya-Golushkevich
developed further by Toigan Izim, Aliya Shankibaeva and Aigul Kulbekova
demonstrated evolution of Kazakh dance from ancient times to the present
day, as reflected in its spiritual culture.

The first documentary evidence of dance is petroglyphs. There is a
number of archaeological sites with petroglyphs in the territory of
modern Kazakhstan, including the UNESCO protected [Archaeological
Landscape of
Tamgaly](https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1145/gallery/&maxrows=27)
(located 170 km northwest of Almaty) with over 5,000 petroglyphs (rock
carvings), 'dating from the second half of the second millennium BC to
the beginning of the 20th century'. Some of the rock carvings captured
the whole dance scenes of those ancient times. The majority of photos
show clear images of animals; some petroglyphs show people's figures
dancing solo and in the group.

![Tamgaly dancing images. Photo credit: Dr Gaygysyz
Joraev](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABAQMAAAAl21bKAAAAA1BMVEUAAP+KeNJXAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAApJREFUCNdjYAAAAAIAAeIhvDMAAAAASUVORK5CYII=){.stk-image
.stk-reset .wp-image-7233 .pk-lazyload width="1265" height="843"}

Our ancient ancestors used their flexible bodies as a natural means of
expressing their feelings and acted as a means of communication. Their
dances had, first of all, a sacred, ritual and ceremonial meaning
related to Totem worship, hunting rituals, and rituals of male warriors
with weapons preparing for battles. These sacred dances reflected the
worldview of our ancestors, their sense and understanding of the
surrounding world, natural phenomena, etc. The dance permeated all human
life.

The classification of the traditional Kazakh folk dances described by
[A. K. Kulbekova et
al.](https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1115663.pdf) is an
illustration of the origins of the Kazakh dance which reflected the
lives, activities, customs and beliefs of our ancestors:

1\. Ritual and ceremonial dances; 2. Combative-hunting dances; 3. Work
dances; 4. Household-imitative dances; 5. Festive and ceremonial dances;
6. Mass-thematic dances.[\[2\]](#_ftn2)

A special place in the dance culture is occupied by the dancing art of
**bakhsy** (shamans). Here I would like to recall Olzhas Suleimenov's
poem "Asian bonfires", which is quoted by the famous choreographer Olga
Vsevolodskaya-Golushkevich in a documentary about the activities of the
folk-dance ensemble 'Altynai'. The legendary Kazakh poet highlights the
role of shamans (*bakhsy*) in understanding the world around the Kazakh
ancestors: 'they \[shamans\] lit the fire and taught how to keep the
fire, to bow to the fire, to treat sciatica and chirium with fire, and
taught to saddle a horse, and believe the sun, and guess by the stars,
from them went -- **and dance and sing'**.

It is known that the main function of Kazakh shamanism was healing. The
ritual process took place through a dance action to the accompaniment of
percussion instruments, and this was considered the culminating point in
shamanistic ritual, after which the shaman, exhausted, foaming at his
mouth, fell unconscious. Musical rhythms and dance moves performed by
shamans (*bakhsy*) were of an improvisational nature. And in general,
improvisation would be the main component of the entire national culture
in general and would be of great importance for the dance art of Kazakh
people, in particular. In the plastic arts of shamans, dance acquired a
magical symbolic meaning.

Let us have a look how certain movements of Kazak dance reflect the
vision of the world. For example, in Kazakh dance there is a hand
movement called "ainalma" -- the rotation of wrists.

Moldakhmetova A.T. in her PhD thesis [\[3\]](#_ftn3) quotes
the thought expressed by Zaurbekova and Djumanova: 'the movement of the
hands of 'Ainalma' reflects the cult of the solar deity; the phenomenon
circle in the structure of the nomadic worldview specifically expresses
the temporal aspect, a twelve-year cycle of *mÒ¯shel*, in which 'human
life is thought of as a transition from one *mushel* to another, which
meant a return to initial state, end and beginning of a new circle in
life space at a qualitatively different level. This, figuratively, the
structure of the unwinding spiral was the most important element of
traditional thinking'.[\[4\]](#_ftn4)

For example, this dance '[Erke
Kyz'](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=35TKzDzSa2U) represents
the whole palette of the intricate rotations of the wrists which creates
a beautiful pattern of the dance. Graceful movements of arms and wrists,
typical for a female Kazakh dance, can be seen in this dance staged by a
wonderful choreographer, Zulfia Aubakirova. A. Shankibaeva, the art
critic explains the meaning of this movement as follows: "one turn of
the wrists, symbolizing the cycle of a full turnover of reception and
return of heavenly well-being, having its deep philosophical meaning, is
a distinctive feature of Kazakh dance'.[\[5\]](#_ftn5)

``{.stk-code style="--stk-embed-height-ratio:56.25%"}

In the Kazakh language there is the word "aynalayin" -- this is how
Kazakhs call a person dear to their hearts, denoting their endless love
for someone close. Kairbekov B. explains the meaning of this word as
follows: 'In translation it sounds like 'I am circling around you!'.
This word is associated with the process of treatment by a Kazakh healer
-- *bakhsy*, who guarded the patient around him, 'taking' his ailment,
transferring it to himself, and in this sense, it would be more accurate
to translate the word 'ainalayin' as 'I am ready to sacrifice myself in
the name of saving you!'[\[6\]](#_ftn6)

As mentioned above, *bakhsy* in their rituals used the indispensable
attributes of a circle and rotation around a person. The *Bakhsy*'s
worldview is characterized by the idea that the Universe consists of the
three worlds: The Upper World, where only spirits live, The Middle
World, where people, animals, plants live along with the spirits, and
The Lower World, where the souls of the dead go to. Thus, the *bakhsy*
is the transmitter between the world of people and the world of spirits.
In the process of shamanic rituals *bakhsy* is able to trace the
struggle between the dark and the light forces, which will be reflected
in his plasticity in the form of movements typical of warriors.

::: {.stk-container .stk-theme_16040__spec .stk-theme_16040__line_quote ce-tag="container" container-name="Big quote with line"}
There were folk *akyns*, singers-improvisers, and folk comedians of the
second half of the 19th and the first half of the 20th centuries, who
were known as the masters of dance art.
:::

In connection with the magical beliefs of people about the
transmigration of the soul to animals, in the *bakhsy* dance we can see
some movements that convey the habits of animals and birds. Some Kazakh
dances are based on imitation of habits of animals, for example: 'Koyan
bi' (dance of the hare), 'Burkit bi' (dance of the golden eagle), 'Ayu
bi' (dance of the bear), 'Orteke' (dance of the goat, trapped in a pit),
etc.

For example, you can see the dancers dancing in animal masks at the
beginning of the [Seryler
saltanaty](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=K_Rz-eCQv44) dance
performed by the students of Kazakh National Academy of Choreography
(music by the folk ethnographic ensemble Khassak; choreography by Anvara
Sadykova and Almat Shamshiev). The dance culture of Kazakh people was
especially developed in the work of steppe performers -- *Sala* and
*sera*. Their work can be considered as a 'theatre of one actor'; they
were universal performers and naturally talented actors: singers,
composers, storytellers, magicians, dancers, wrestlers, jugglers, etc.
They performed in *auls*, where they entertained their audience with
various kinds of performances.

``{.stk-code style="--stk-embed-height-ratio:56.25%"}

Dance performed by the students of Kazakh National Academy of
Choreography (music by the folk ethnographic ensemble Khassak;
choreography by Anvara Sadykova and Almat Shamshiev)

There were also folk *akyns*, singers-improvisers, and folk comedians of
the second half of the 19th and the first half of the 20th centuries,
who were known as the masters of dance art. For example, Berikbol
Kopenov (1861-1932) -- a singer, dombra player, amateur artist,
*kyuishi*, poet, dancer, nicknamed *Agash-ayak* ('wooden leg') -- was
famous for his ability to dance on stilts. According to Abirov and
Ismailov[\[7\]](#_ftn7), Kazakh researchers of dance
history, Shashubai Koshkarbayev (1865-1952) -- a Kazakh *akyn*, poet and
composer -- performed his songs to the accompaniment of an accordion and
dombra.

He used to jump on a horse before the performance and demonstrate a
horseman dance at full speed, standing in the saddle, then jumped to the
ground and danced around horse. He was also a master of a comic dance
called *Orteke* (literal translation of *Orteke* is 'a goat caught in a
pit').

D. Abirov also mentions the names of folk dancers of the first quarter
of the XX century: Akhmet Bersagimov, who was nicknamed *Zhyndy Kara*,
who performed dances and satirical pantomimes, where he ridiculed *bays*
(local wealthy governors) and feudal lords, for which he was nicknamed
'*zhynda*' (fool). Zarubay Kulseitov was famous for performing the
dances '*Koyan bi*' (hare dance), '*Koyan men burkit*' (hare and golden
eagle). Doskey Alimbaev (1850-1946) -- Kazakh *akyn* danced '*Utys bi*'
(dance-competition), as well as '*Kusbegi -- dauylpaz*' (hunter with a
bird and a drummer).

The name of Iskhak Byzhybayev is especially close to us. A unique
chronicle has come down to us, where he performs the comic dance
'*Nasybaishy*', surprising in its originality, at the folk-dance
festival in 1936 in Moscow. The plot of the dance, colourful movements,
which are sometimes striking in their complexity, are vivid evidence of
the presence of a unique dance culture among Kazakh people.

![*Dance "Nasybayshi" performed by Iskhak Byzhybayev at the folk-dance
festivalÂ *in Moscow, 1936. From Dauren Abirov's
archives**](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABAQMAAAAl21bKAAAAA1BMVEUAAP+KeNJXAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAApJREFUCNdjYAAAAAIAAeIhvDMAAAAASUVORK5CYII=){.stk-image
.stk-reset .wp-image-7228 .pk-lazyload width="1109" height="759"}

![Fragment from the movie "Blue Route". Aubakir Ismailov performing the
dance "Kara Zhorga". 1968.Â From Anvara Sadykova's
archives.](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABAQMAAAAl21bKAAAAA1BMVEUAAP+KeNJXAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAApJREFUCNdjYAAAAAIAAeIhvDMAAAAASUVORK5CYII=){.stk-image
.stk-reset .wp-image-7231 .pk-lazyload width="1242" height="897"}

The first national performers and choreographers led the way to the
development of Kazakh stage dance by creating a number of wonderful
choreographic works that later made up the golden fund of the national
choreography. These are productions by Shara Zhienkulova, Aubakir
Ismailov, Dauren Abirov, Yuri Kovalev, Zaurbek Raibayev, Bulat
Ayukhanov, Mintay Tleubaev, Eldos Usin, Zhanat Baydaralin, Olga
Vsevolodskaya-Golushkevich, Gainikamal Beisenova, Gulsaule Orumbaeva,
Aigul Tati, etc.

Today in Kazakhstan there are four ballet theatres with a unique
repertoire -- the Kazakh National Opera and Ballet Theatre named after
Abai (established in 1934), the State Academic Dance Theatre of the
Republic of Kazakhstan under the direction of Bulat Ayukhanov
(established in 1967), the State Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre
'Astana Opera' (established in 2013), State Theatre 'Astana Ballet'
(established in 2012). Theatre of contemporary dance 'Samruk'
(established in 1998), State dance theatre 'Naz' (established in 1999),
State Dance Ensembles 'Saltanat' (established in 1955), 'Altynai' (since
1985), dance ensembles at philharmonic halls in the regions of
Kazakhstan, etc.

And this list goes on and on ... Our mission is to preserve this unique
cultural heritage and look for new ways of developing our national
choreography which currently absorbs the best traditions of classical
and contemporary dance as well as the heritage of our ancestors.

And answering your question, I can say that without the presence of the
deep national song, music and dance traditions that have been formed for
centuries in the Kazakh steppe, the ability to be open to other
cultures, absorb and accept what is close in spirit, in moral values, we
could not present today what we call the Kazakh national culture as a
whole.

****Since the beginning of 2010, the dance 'Kara Zhorga' (Black Pacer)
was become widely known. The dance quickly spread on the Internet and
became a popular piece for flash mobs, advertisements, numerous online
lessons and one of the favourite dances for weddings. The accompanying
song with a light, easy and cheerful text, full of humour, appealed to
people of all ages.**** ****According to some Internet sources, Arystan
Shadetuly, a native Kazakh from China, who returned to his homeland in
1995, is considered the 'revivalist' of dance in Kazakhstan. How can you
explain the origins of this
dance?![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABAQMAAAAl21bKAAAAA1BMVEUAAP+KeNJXAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAApJREFUCNdjYAAAAAIAAeIhvDMAAAAASUVORK5CYII=){.stk-reset
.stk-theme_16040__symbol_custom_image_1866407 .stk-icon
.pk-lazyload}****

I have great respect for Arystan-ata. We invited him to take part in the
making of our documentary 'Kazakh Dance'. He is an excellent performer
of the dance 'Kara Zhorga': a plastic, musical, original dancer. In my
opinion, of course, Arystan Shadetuly played a big role in the
popularisation of this dance in Kazakhstan.

However, it should be emphasized that on the territory of modern
Kazakhstan, the dance 'Kara Zhorga' was also performed in Soviet times,
but under a different name 'Buyn bi' (dance of joints).

The repertoire of the aforementioned ensemble 'Altynai' to this day
includes the dance 'Buyn bi' staged by Olga Vsevolodskaya-Golushkevich,
who created her dances under the close attention of the ethnographer
Uzbekali Dzhanibekov. And the performance of this dance among the people
is proved by the following episode, when Uzbekali Dzhanibekov met two
tractor drivers living in the Narynkol district of the Almaty region,
skilfully performing the 'Buyn bi' dance. It was their performance of
this dance that inspired the creation of a choreographic composition for
the 'Altynai' ensemble under accompaniment of a *kyui* (folk
instrumental musical composition).

Today the elements of the 'Buyn bi' dance are included in the main
programme of the Kazakh male dance, as the section 'Buyn oinatu' -- 'The
game of joints'.

``{.stk-code style="--stk-embed-height-ratio:56.25%"}

Orazbai BodauhanulyÂ dances Kara Zhorga

****What is common and fundamentally different between these two dances
-- 'Kara Zhorga' and 'Buyn
Bi'?![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABAQMAAAAl21bKAAAAA1BMVEUAAP+KeNJXAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAApJREFUCNdjYAAAAAIAAeIhvDMAAAAASUVORK5CYII=){.stk-reset
.stk-theme_16040__symbol_custom_image_1866407 .stk-icon
.pk-lazyload}****

First, we should think about the very name of the dance and its meaning.
'Kara Zhorga' is translated from the Kazakh language as 'black pacer',
i.e., in this dance, the performers depict horsemen prancing on pacers.
In the book 'Kazakh folk dances' written by D. Abirov and A. Ismailov
(1961), the dance 'Kara Zhorga' is described as follows: 'The dance
shows the agility, dexterity, cheerful enthusiasm of a horseman who has
completely mastered the art of horse riding. This dance was popular
among the people in various versions and under various names: 'Kara
Zhorga', 'Zhorgalau' (a ride on a pacer), 'Zhorgany elikteu' (imitation
of a pacer)'.[\[8\]](#_ftn8) They mention that the folk
melodies were performed on dombra and used as an accompaniment to the
dances 'Kara Zhorga' and 'Bozaigyr'. In 1928, the dance 'Kara Zhorga'
(recorded by Aktay Mamanov) was performed in Petropavlovsk on the stage
of the People's House.[\[9\]](#_ftn9)

Further, Shara Zhienkulova in her book 'The Secret of Dance' (1980)
describes the dance 'Kara Zhorga' as a 'group male dance \[that\]
depicts an equestrian sport. The number of dancers can be four and more.
Each performer holds a *kamcha* \[a whip\] in his right
hand'.[\[10\]](#_ftn10)

D. Abirov in his later book 'History of Kazakh Dance' (1997) provides
analysis of the movements of 'Kara Zhorga' as it was performed in the
play 'Ayman-Sholpan' in 1934, staged by Ali Ibragimov (1899 -- 1959), a
famous Central Asian dancer and choreographer, known under pseudonym
Ardobus. A. Ardobus puts on 'Kara Zhorga' as the imitation of horse
riding -- sports games of young people on horseback. The choreographic
text consisted of energetic jumps with waving a whip (*kamcha*) over the
head, jumps with a back bend of the body, springy small bounces in
place. The dance was designed to be performed by one
person'.[\[11\]](#_ftn11)

Both D. Abirov and A. Ismailov in the description of the dance 'Kara
Zhorga' specifically presented such movements as 'zheldirme' (trotting),
'moldas' (rocking chair), 'tebingi' (spurring), 'shalys' (hook),
'Monkime' (jumping with clenched knees, 'shabys' (gallop), 'ytymaly
aynalma'. All these movements are unique, distinctive, perfectly
conveying daring, agility, strength, character, manner of a male dance.
These movements were included in the main male Kazakh dance study
programme.

Abirov explains the popularity of 'Kara Zhorga' by historical reasons:
'For Kazakh nomads, life without a horse was unthinkable. \[...\] The
horse was an indispensable form of transport for moving across the vast
steppe and mountains. Thanks to his horse, the Kazakh participated in
battles, in all kinds of national games, on it he looked for pastures,
escaped from disaster. The people admired the good horse. Obviously,
therefore, in legends, heroic poems and legends, the people praised the
horse as a faithful friend'.[\[12\]](#_ftn12) 'Obviously,
the birth of the dance 'Kara Zhorga' is associated with the observation
of people at the unusual pace of the pacer, differing in trot or gallop
from other horses. Fractional kicks of legs, rhythmic clatter of hooves,
swaying from side to side of the head, bursts of mane, swaying of the
croup created the impression of a dance. \[...\] .. Therefore, in the
dance 'Kara Zhorga' we find movements reminiscent of a pacer's running
and swaying shoulders.'[\[13\]](#_ftn13)

Based on these works of the classics of Kazakh choreography, we
appreciate that the name of the dance 'Kara Zhorga' still meant a
somewhat different dance in its form, in contrast to the one that is now
universally performed under this name. We are convinced that, the
today's dance 'Kara Zhorga' was called by us as the dance 'Buyn bi' (the
dance of joints) in the past. And this name more accurately and more
specifically defines the movement behaviour of the performer. The
dancers actively engaged the joints of different parts of the body,
particularly the joints of fingers, wrists, arms, shoulders as well as
their knee-joints and ankles. Their performance was based on a momentary
improvisation of a shaman who would express his feelings and emotions
through his body movements.

Analysing the nature of the dance movements, which we call 'Buyn bi',
one can clearly trace its ancient origin, its connection with the
*Bakhsy* culture. Circular, sharp and expressive movements of the joints
are a distinctive basic element of this dance. Through such plastic, one
can see the ritual dance of *bakhsy*, whereby he communicated with the
spirits. The other function also traced here is a healing one. Each
element of '*Buyn bi* 'meant to awaken the body and increase blood
circulation to increase the inner heat and energy to perform his
shamanic rituals.

::: {.stk-container .stk-theme_16040__spec .stk-theme_16040__line_quote ce-tag="container" container-name="Big quote with line"}
'Kara Zhorga' was known and danced by our ancestors as 'Buyn bi' -- 'the
dance of joints' originated from Bakhsy culture and shamanism.
:::

This established lexicography of traditional dance movements passed into
the culture of unique steppe performers, who conveyed different emotions
through the musical accompaniment of *dombra*. The performer danced both
in the yurt and in the open air. Arystan Shadetuly shared a very
interesting observation during filming of the documentary 'Kazakh
Dance': "The performer danced in the centre of the yurt. His 'stage'
size was equal to one ram skin'. Therefore, the dominant steppe
monoculture was vividly embodied in the dance genre as performed by a
single dancer (although this does not at all deny the mass performance
of dances).

This watercolour sketch by Cheredeev -- the Russian artist-topographer,
who visited Kazakh lands as part of the expedition of the Russian
Geographical Society in 1854 -- is an illustration of his opinion.
Cheredeev 's sketch 'Yurt of the Sultan 'Davlet-Gerei' shows a Kazakh
man dancing in a limited space, in the middle of the
yurt.[\[14\]](#_ftn14)

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABAQMAAAAl21bKAAAAA1BMVEUAAP+KeNJXAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAApJREFUCNdjYAAAAAIAAeIhvDMAAAAASUVORK5CYII=){.stk-image
.stk-reset .wp-image-7229 .pk-lazyload width="1019" height="769"}

To summarise the origins of 'Kara Zhorga' which is well-known and
popular today, I would like to reiterate my point that this dance was
known and danced by our ancestors as 'Buyn bi' -- 'the dance of joints'
originated from Bakhsy culture and shamanism. The 'Kara Zhorga' dance in
interpretation of the Kazakh dance classics (D. Abirov, A. Ismailov) is
primarily a 'black pacer dance' depicting a horseman prancing on pacers.
I would say that the name 'Kara Zhorga' was 'borrowed' to name the dance
that was actually known to our ancestors as 'Buyn bi'. It is especially
noticeable in the dances performed by these two Kazakh gentlemen who are
amazingly flexible and acrobatic regardless of their respectable age --
[Orazbai
Bodauhanuly](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=VWseUWdE58g&feature=youtu.be)
and [Shedet
Maikanuly](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=eBJ4ppe_5vE&feature=youtu.be).
Do you know why they are so flexible and agile? Because they regularly
stretched their joints by dancing 'Kara Zhorga', which our ancestors
used to call 'Buyn bi'!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {.stk-container .stk-theme_16001__spec .stk-theme_16001__author_block ce-tag="container" container-name="Small portrait"}
::: {.stk-container .stk-post-portrait-image ce-tag="container"}
:::

::: {.stk-container .stk-portrait-text ce-tag="container"}
By Rosa Vercoe

**Rosa Vercoe is an independent dance researcher. She is based in St
Albans (United Kingdom). She is passionate about promoting Central Asian
art and culture in the United Kingdom. Her main interest lies in Uzbek
dance and its history and origins.**
:::
:::

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) Zhienkulova, Shara, 1980, Tayna tanca
\[Secret of dance\], Oner, Alma-Ata.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Kulbekova, A.K. et al., 2016, The
methodological framework of occupational training in culture and art
high schools of Kazakhstan, in: International Journal of Environmental &
Science Education, Vol. 11, No. 12, p. 5270.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Ðoldakhmetova, Ð.T., 2020,
Rezhissyorskaya interpretatciya kazakhskogo tanca v choreograficheskom
iskusstve Kazakhstana konca Ð¥Ð¥ -- nachala Ð¥Ð¥I veka \[Producer's
interpretation of Kazakh dance in the choreographic art of Kazakhstan at
the end of the XX -- beginning of the XXI century\], Kazakhskaya
nacionalnaya akademiya iskusstv imeni Ð¢.Ð. Zhurgenova, Almaty,
Dissertaciya na soiskaniye akademicheskoy stepeni doktora PhD, p.42.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Zaurbekova, L., Djumanova, G., Ð., 2000,
Mirovozzrenie kazakhov // sbornik. Traditcionnaya kultura kochevnikov
\[Worldview of the Kazakhs// Collection. Traditional nomad culture\],
Almaty: KazNAI imeni. Ð¢. Zhurgenova, p. 57.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Shankibaeva, A.B., 2011, Kazakhskaya
choreografiya: razvitie form I khudozgestvennyh sredstv. Monografiya
\[Kazakh Choreography: development of forms and artistic means.
Monography\], Almaty, p.66.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Kairbekov, B.G., 2012, Natcionalnye
obychai I traditicii. Kazakhskiy etiket \[National customs and
traditions. Kazakh etiquette\], Almaty, p.10.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) Abirov, D., Ismailov, A., 1961,
Kazakhskie narodnye tancy \[Kazakh folk dances\], Alma-Ata, p.7.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Abirov, D., Ismailov, A., 1961,
Kazakhskie narodnye tancy \[Kazakh folk dances\], Alma-Ata, p.41.

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) Ibid.:41.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) Zhienkulova, Shara, 1980, Tayna tanca
\[Secret of dance\], Oner, Alma-Ata, p. 58.

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) Abirov, D., 1997, Istoriya Kazakhskogo
tanca. Uchebnoye posobie \[The History of Kazakh Dance. Tutorial\],
Almaty, p. 22.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) Ibid.: 86.

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) Ibid.: 87

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) Cheredeev, P., Vnutrennost kibitki
sultana Vnytrenney Kirgizskoy Ordy Devlet Gireya, In: Kazakhi: istoriya
I kultura /rukovoditel projekta A. S. Bimendiev; glavnyi nauchnyi
redactor Ð.Z. Uskenbay, Almaty, \[Inside the yurt of the Sultan of the
Inner Kirghiz Horde Devlet Giray//The Kazakhs: history and culture\],
ABDI Company ÐÐ, 2013, pp. 288 -- 289. From the funds of the Astrakhan
Regional Library named after N.K. Krupskaya.
:::
-->